README.md, before:

# ACES Output Transforms
This repository contains a set of modules that declare presets that will result in Outputs to some commonly used standard output display setups. These include presets designed targeting the same list of outputs as ACES v1.x as well as adding a few new ones. Users are _not_ limited to only the transforms listed in this repository. 

Specifics about the transform parameters and how they are intended to be used can be found on the [ACES documentation site](docs.acescentral.com).

## Dependencies
All transforms save pre-set display parameters but the rendering itself is dependent on the core Lib files tracked in [aces-core](github.com/ampas/aces-dev). These Lib files must be added to the `CTL_MODULE_PATH` environment variable (see section 3.2 in "CTLManual.pdf" for details).

## Notes

### Contrib directory
The `contrib` directory contains community-supplied transforms, provided as-is and may not be optimal. The ACES team may have done minimal testing on these transforms, but please visit [ACESCentral.com](https://community.acescentral.com) to review or leave feedback.

### Note to Implementers

#### Implementation Guidelines
- **Primary Transforms**: The transforms located in each of the subdirectories of the root directory, with the exception of the `contrib` directory, are a basic subset of possible outputs and should be implemented in all ACES systems. These subdirectories contain the standardized, validated transforms necessary for maintaining compatibility and functionality across different platforms and devices.
- **Community Contributed Transforms**: The `contrib` directory contains additional community-supplied transforms. These are considered optional. They may provide useful extensions but vary in their testing and support. It is advisable to evaluate their reliability and suitability for your specific needs before integration.
- **Updates and Maintenance**: Ensure your system includes the most recent updates by regularly incorporating new or revised transforms from the main subdirectories, keeping in line with the latest ACES specifications and industry practices.


### Inverse Transforms
Careful examination of the transforms list will show that not every forward transform has a corresponding inverse transform. In cases where the forward Output Transform has some set of gamut limiting primaries smaller than the display encoding primaries, the inverse for those limited versions have been omitted in favor of a generic inverse from the display encoding container.

It is expected that, if needed, one could use an inverse for the maximum gamut encoded by the display rather than specifically "undo-ing" gamut limited values. In theory, inverse transforms using the specific limiting gamut should be unnecessary, although in practice users may find slight differences in behavior if the make and use an inverse that explicitly accounts for the limiting gamut rather than assuming a generic gamut the size of the display container.


### Identical outputs
Though separate transforms, in practice the code values output by the P3D65 and P3D60 transforms are identical if compared "by the numbers". This is because the outputs are intended to be viewed on different monitors each set such that equal code values produce the chromaticity of either D65 or D60. While we could easily have a single "P3 for equal code value output" transform, each exists with its own name for explicitness and to avoid confusion. Use the one that is appropriate to your projector white point setting and assumed observer adapted white.


### Signal Range
By default, all transforms output signal as full range code values. If a SMPTE "legal" signal is required, one can use built-in tools available in whatever software they are using or apply a separate CTL utility transform to convert full range to SMPTE legal range or vice versa. 

In ctlrender, this can be achieved in by appending another `-ctl` call to the end of a transform chain. e.g. add `-ctl Utility.Full_to_Legal.ctl` after the initial `-ctl odt.ctl` string.

Commit message:

readme updates
- update README.md
- add SUPPORT.md
- add contrib directory and contrib README.md

README.md, after:

# ACES Output Transforms #

[![CLA assistant](https://cla-assistant.io/readme/badge/ampas/aces-output)](https://cla-assistant.io/ampas/aces-output)

This repository contains a set of modules that declare presets that will result in Outputs to some commonly used standard output display setups. These include presets designed targeting the same list of outputs as ACES v1.x as well as adding a few new ones. Users are _not_ limited to only the transforms listed in this repository. 

Specifics about the transform parameters and how they are intended to be used can be found on the [ACES documentation site](docs.acescentral.com).

## Dependencies ##
All transforms save pre-set display parameters but the rendering itself is dependent on the core Lib files tracked in [aces-core](github.com/ampas/aces-dev). These Lib files must be added to the `CTL_MODULE_PATH` environment variable (see section 3.2 in "CTLManual.pdf" for details).

## Notes ##

### Contrib directory ###
The `contrib` directory contains community-supplied transforms, provided as-is and may not be optimal. The ACES team may have done minimal testing on these transforms, but please visit [ACESCentral.com](https://community.acescentral.com) to review or leave feedback.

### Note to Implementers ###

#### Implementation Guidelines ####
- **Primary Transforms**: The transforms located in each of the subdirectories of the root directory, with the exception of the `contrib` directory, are a basic subset of possible outputs and should be implemented in all ACES systems. These subdirectories contain the standardized, validated transforms necessary for maintaining compatibility and functionality across different platforms and devices.
- **Community Contributed Transforms**: The `contrib` directory contains additional community-supplied transforms. These are considered optional. They may provide useful extensions but vary in their testing and support. It is advisable to evaluate their reliability and suitability for your specific needs before integration.
- **Updates and Maintenance**: Ensure your system includes the most recent updates by regularly incorporating new or revised transforms from the main subdirectories, keeping in line with the latest ACES specifications and industry practices.

### Inverse Transforms ###
Careful examination of the transforms list will show that not every forward transform has a corresponding inverse transform. In cases where the forward Output Transform has some set of gamut limiting primaries smaller than the display encoding primaries, the inverse for those limited versions have been omitted in favor of a generic inverse from the display encoding container.

It is expected that, if needed, one could use an inverse for the maximum gamut encoded by the display rather than specifically "undo-ing" gamut limited values. In theory, inverse transforms using the specific limiting gamut should be unnecessary, although in practice users may find slight differences in behavior if the make and use an inverse that explicitly accounts for the limiting gamut rather than assuming a generic gamut the size of the display container.

### Identical outputs ###
Though separate transforms, in practice the code values output by the P3D65 and P3D60 transforms are identical if compared "by the numbers". This is because the outputs are intended to be viewed on different monitors each set such that equal code values produce the chromaticity of either D65 or D60. While we could easily have a single "P3 for equal code value output" transform, each exists with its own name for explicitness and to avoid confusion. Use the one that is appropriate to your projector white point setting and assumed observer adapted white.

### Signal Range ###
By default, all transforms output signal as full range code values. If a SMPTE "legal" signal is required, one can use built-in tools available in whatever software they are using or apply a separate CTL utility transform to convert full range to SMPTE legal range or vice versa. 

In ctlrender, this can be achieved in by appending another `-ctl` call to the end of a transform chain. e.g. add `-ctl Utility.Full_to_Legal.ctl` after the initial `-ctl odt.ctl` string.

## License ##
This project is licensed under the terms of the [LICENSE](./LICENSE.md) agreement.

## Contributing ##
Thank you for your interest in contributing to our project. Before any contributions can be accepted, we require contributors to sign a Contributor License Agreement (CLA) to ensure that the project can freely use your contributions. You can find more details and instructions on how to sign the CLA in the [CONTRIBUTING.md](./CONTRIBUTING.md) file.

## Support ## 
For support, please visit [ACESCentral.com](https://acescentral.com)
